- Well, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
- Thank you, it's good to be here.
- Man, it's fantastic to have you here.
Really looking forward to talking about the progress
you've made on Rich and Textual and your company,
which is pretty fantastic.
The show is not specifically about that,
it's more about all these fantastic lessons
that you've learned while building it,
but of course we'll get a chance to talk about it
and give some updates too, I'm sure.
- Cool, sounds good to me.
- Yeah, well, normally I ask folks
how they got into programming and whatnot.
People, if they wanna hear that story,
they can go back and check out your episode 336
on Talk Python way back, way back last year,
about a year ago.
- It's a lifetime ago.
- I know, in terms of what's happened
with your projects and stuff,
it really is kind of a lifetime ago.
So what I wanna ask you instead is,
What have you been up to the last year?
Give us an update.
- Yeah, okay, so I founded textualize.io,
a new startup.
I've hired developers and we're very busy
working on textual, and it's come on really well.
It's amazing.
There's more than I thought it would do,
to be honest with you.
Oh, textualize.io.
(laughing)
- Yeah, textualize, there we go.
The other one's for sale if you want it.
I get that all the time, sorry.
Yeah, so you've been working on Textualize and you actually got some investments and
you're hiring and amazing.
I'm so happy for you.
Thank you.
Yeah, it was…
And yet when I first heard that I'm like, well, what is the business model?
What is the business model here?
Like what are you all working towards?
Like you just leverage the terminal, right?
Even more.
Yeah, that's right.
So that's a very reasonable question that everyone asks.
So the first part is textual, which will be open source and distributed just like any
other open source project.
But we will add on this commercial service where you can take those textual apps and
then you can put them in the web.
And then when they're on the web, we can charge companies and organizations a monthly fee
for various services such as accounts and things and maybe payment portals and things.
But it will be a very generous free tier for hobbyists
and for open source projects that want to do the same.
- Fantastic.
So we have SaaS, or Software as a Service.
We have PaaS, P-A-A-S, for Platform as a Service.
And the whole style of apps from textual
and to a lesser degree rich,
often go under the terminology of TUI,
a text user interface, right?
So TUI as a service, TAS, T-A-S.
Are you creating a new as a service?
- Yeah, I kind of like it.
TAS, you get, you know, in tech we love our acronyms.
So if I don't invent at least one, I'll be disappointed.
- That's right, that's right.
And if they can have like, you know, multiple cases, right?
Like a capital T-A-S, then I think it's gonna be great.
Yeah, it's one of the better types of acronyms.
- Yeah, yeah.
Fantastic.
Now, I think this is great.
And you know, there's one of the things I'm really fascinated about, and for a long time
I've been trying to pay attention to and highlight, is how do people go from open source project
to business?
And when I first started the podcast and really started to think about these things, it seemed
like there was not that many great answers.
It felt like a lot of, well, here's my PayPal donation link or something.
And it just seemed like, well, okay, that might feel good as a thanks, but you cannot
make that your job to say, buy me a coffee most of the time.
There's a lot of progress lately, isn't there?
Yeah, from GitHub sponsors and similar programs.
You can get sponsorship and it can be enough to live on.
It's not easy, the type of projects that get sponsored are the ones which are super critical
to businesses.
And in that case, companies don't mind donating $300 a month, and if you get enough of those,
you could live on it, and some people certainly do.
But I don't think it's practical for most people.
Even if your open source project is widely used and popular, it might not bring in enough
sponsorship to live on, unfortunately.
>> Yeah, unfortunately.
And so I do think GitHub sponsors really is kind of that done right.
You know, it's recurring, it's automatic.
It has a social signal benefit, right?
Like you can see who is sponsoring which projects.
So if you're an organization, right, like you could say, "Oh, look, our company sponsors
that project or whatever.
- Yeah, it's very well done.
Actually, I've got no problems with it's done.
You can, like I said, you can contribute every month
or you can contribute a one-off
and you can get your name mentioned on the project
and the author of the project can offer various perks.
So I think it's nicely done.
- The other one that I see really,
this might be the most popular one
is take an open source thing and then take away,
help alleviate or completely solve
the operational side of things, right?
For example, we have MongoDB and then they have Atlas,
which lets you push a button and manage your cluster
automatically inside your own AWS or Azure account.
We've got Streamlit, which just got acquired,
has a lot of similarities to what you're doing.
You know, it's like, it's got an open source version,
you can create these dashboards, it's really cool.
But then what, how do you put them on the internet?
How do you maintain them?
Right, and then, well, guess what?
There's a paid tier that just runs it
in our cloud for you, right?
So it seems like a really great,
really great path to proceed down
for what you're doing here.
- Yeah, that's right.
They've got time for it, it's called OpenCore.
So you use the open source part to drive adoption.
And then you can use that to sell some related services,
which will just make life easier for businesses and things.
'Cause there's a long history of businesses
making use of open source projects
and making a lot of money out of it.
But they haven't really put that money in to the business.
So if the people that are building and maintaining
these open source projects can also build side businesses
around the open source project,
then everyone benefits because your code gets maintained
for the indefinite future
and people can make a living from it.
- Yeah, if you would otherwise have to hire somebody
to manage a Kubernetes cluster or whatever,
and instead you can pay $20 a month,
like that's a real good deal.
- Exactly, and you don't want to have to solve
all these problems individually for everyone that uses it,
it's actually far better for someone
to solve it once and for all, or at least reduce
the footprint for maintenance.
- Yeah, who else better to figure out
how to put it in the cloud than people
who are creating it, right?
- Yeah, exactly, yeah.
- Yeah, for sure.
Okay, so fantastic.
I'm looking forward to Tui as a service
to come on strong here, that's great.
So maybe before we jump into the lessons learned,
just tell people about what textual is
and then textual is built upon rich.
So give us the quick rundown on,
take whichever order you think is better
to go first, rich or textual.
- I think rich, I'll go in chronological order.
So I started rich, gosh, it must be like three years now.
And the idea was to be able to write color text,
the terminal, in a nice, elegant way,
and also be able to build on that with larger components.
So we've got things like tables,
we've got progress bars, we've got log messages,
panels, all sorts of things.
And they're all using the same core rendering technology,
which basically takes your objects
and then turns it into ANSI codes and text.
And that got fairly popular, shall we say.
I was surprised.
- I would say.
I would say so too.
- Yeah, it's in pip now, which still blows me away
because that means that virtually every Python developer
is running my code, which also scares me just a little bit.
- That's right, because I mean, if you have Python,
you have pip, so you have rich.
Is it a package with pip as a dependency
Or is it vendored in?
It's vendored, because you've got a chicken and egg
problem with pip.
Because pip is how you get the things, right?
Exactly.
So everything is vendored.
PIP is just one project with lots of vendored projects
inside of it.
Yeah.
OK.
Yeah, fantastic.
So Rich-- yeah, for people who haven't seen it in action,
it's not just like Colorama or something,
which I'm a big fan of Colorama.
But that's just about how do I make this line,
this color or whatever.
But you're talking about like tables with auto,
you know, auto ellipsing and all sorts of really,
really powerful content, right?
- Yeah, and some things which you might take for granted
in the browser, like text wrapping,
that wasn't easy to do prior to Rich.
They're just more complex than you might think.
Things like emoji and Chinese characters.
Those take up two cells in the terminal.
If you use the built-in text wrap module,
that won't account for that,
and your text wrapping will be misaligned.
So I wanted to solve those kind of problems.
I just wanted to be effortless.
You just say, "Print this text,"
and it'll wrap it for you,
which generally makes it a lot more readable.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- So there's a lot going on there.
- I would say so.
I don't know how many projects are using rich now,
but it's--
there constantly seems to be like,
and now this has rich support.
So it has a much better output, or it's more understandable,
or whatever, right?
A lot of cool things happen.
Yeah.
And I'm delighted every time I read one of those.
I do try to make it quite easy to drop things in.
For instance, if you're printing out Python data structures,
you can use a rich method, and you'll
get pretty printing and colorizing built in.
And things like exception handling,
we've got very pretty exceptions that show you snippets of code
and can highlight the line where the error occurred.
And you can add those with just a few lines.
So I think that's kind of pushing adoption
is the fact that there is very low barrier to entry.
Yeah.
And it's just beautiful, right?
It's easy to make beautiful UIs.
And if you make it easy for people to make nice looking things, they want to use it.
I mean, it's not as used as much these days, but think of when Bootstrap came on the scene,
you know, eight years ago or 10 years, whatever it was, 10 years ago, everything started to
look like Bootstrap because you could just apply this magic and like, oh, everything
looks like professional, but we're not professional.
And I feel like Rich is a little bit like that for 2E's.
Yeah, I think so.
Because it was very difficult to add pretty formatting prior to rich.
I mean, there were libraries that existed, but they didn't integrate very well.
Rich kind of combines all of that functionality together.
So it's very easy to add pretty content.
And it's not just pretty for pretty sake.
Pretty can also mean more readable.
You know, as developers, we get presented with pages and pages of content that we learn
to decipher and pick out meaning.
But we can do that much quicker if there's been some forethought into how it's presented
and rendered in the terminal.
And Rich does give you that capability.
Yeah, absolutely.
Jamie out in the audience says, "I love Rich.
Rich Traceback is so helpful."
Can you just quickly touch on the traceback?
And then also, Demetrius is asking about,
is this for Jupyter, is it only a thing for Linux terminals?
And maybe sort of touch on those two things,
and we'll talk textual.
- Tracebacks, yeah, you can install a traceback handler,
and it will capture unhandled tracebacks
and present them nicely in the terminal.
What was the other question?
Where does this apply?
Can I use this on Windows?
Can I use it on Mac?
Is it for Jupyter?
What is this?
Pretty much everywhere.
So you can use it on all the major platforms--
Linux, Mac, and Windows.
And yes, it does work in Jupyter.
So it'll convert the ANSI codes to HTML automatically.
That's actually the most impressive thing to me.
That must be a lot of work to maintain
all these different output destinations?
- The terminal is not too bad.
So macOS and Linux are frankly the same
as far as I'm concerned.
Windows has a number of tweaks and hacks
because we have this, there's two windows basically.
Newer Windows has virtual terminal sequences
which make it just like the Linux and Mac terminal
and that's terrific.
But we also support the older style terminal,
which is quite limited.
And there are a few--
- Right, right, the cmd.exe is not nearly as powerful
as the new terminal.
- No, it's not.
So we have to make some compromises and some sacrifices.
It works, it's usable, it won't look quite as pretty.
But there's a lot of people using that out there,
so it's important to maintain.
- Yeah, you can't really drop it.
- Yeah.
Can't drop it.
OK, so then the other thing that's
more directly related to your article and to your business,
although obviously one's a building block, so same.
It's Textual.
Yeah.
So Rich was for writing static content
into your terminal, your scroll back buffer.
What Textual does is it uses Rich,
but it completely takes over your terminal
to create an application.
You don't see a command prompt, but textual will handle key presses and mouse movements
and it will render quite sophisticated applications which look more like web apps than the previous
generation of 2Es.
But under the hood, it's using the same code that renders tables in Rich.
It's kind of a, I call it a rendering engine.
designed to take sort of abstract data and then turn it into what I call segments, which
are basically a piece of text with a style.
It's pretty amazing.
You know, if you look at the UI, it's got, it really does feel a bit like a web app.
It has, say, like a title bar across the top and, you know, this isn't just like text you
printed out on the top of the app.
No.
It's stuck to the top like a nav bar, I guess, is the right word.
where you have these different widgets you can put in line,
like code highlighting.
You've got text widgets with scrolling within scrolling.
You've got animated sidebars that pop out.
All these cool different aspects, right?
Even a hotkey support for D to toggle dark and light mode
if you want.
Yeah.
We've even got data tables now, which are pretty cool.
They look kind of like little Excel Windows type
of spreadsheets, which you can put lots of data in.
in. So it is, my background is as a web developer basically. So I wanted to make something which
anyone who knows how to use the web, which is pretty much everyone, they would be comfortable
using one of these applications. You could just sit them down in front of it and they'll
know exactly what to do. They'll know that this is a menu, they can click that. Here's
a scroll bar, they'll know how to use the scroll bar. It'll work with a mouse wheel
or two fingered scroll on a trackpad.
It'll just be very, very familiar.
But at the same time, I also want to keep it
keyboard focused, because one of the benefits of a TUI
is it doesn't interrupt your flow.
You know, you can be at the terminal typing commands,
enter into a TUI, and you could work with that
and use the keyboard, and they can drop back
straight into the command line.
So it's kind of this marriage of the command line
and more sophisticated applications which work a lot like desktop and web.
Yeah. Previously when people wanted to create apps like this, one, it was very difficult
to do. But if they wanted to come somewhat close to these types of things, they would
use a library called Curses or something like that, right?
Yeah. And Curses has been around for a long time, I think decades. I can't remember off
top of my head, but I think from the 90s it came around.
And people have done some very cool things with it
and there have been attempts to improve upon it.
But I think still it does take,
you have to be very well motivated
to create an application with curses
'cause you're gonna have to deal
with some quite archaic issues.
- Yeah, I haven't done a ton with it,
but it feels to me like the equivalent of saying
like textual versus curses would be like,
you could either use something like Pygame
where you can give some sprites
and they can move around the screen,
or you could fire up OpenGL or DirectX or Metal
and you could start rendering pixels on your own.
You could accomplish the same UI,
but one is tremendously difficult.
The other one kind of gives you much higher level
building blocks to accomplish the same thing.
Yeah, exactly.
So a textual is more abstract.
You don't have to plot individual characters.
You just say, put a text box in this part of the screen
and a button in this part of the screen.
And textual handles the rest.
So it's less archaic aspects of terminals
that go back decades that you have to think about.
Let the framework handle it and handle the differences, right?
Yeah, exactly.
That's what computing should be.
It should make your life easier.
You shouldn't have to think about decades old data.
You know, you hear in science people
talking about standing on the shoulders of giants,
of building on Einstein, and whatever.
There's nothing else that stands on the shoulders
of previous work like software.
It's just layers and layers and layers.
We don't have to think about that anymore.
We now have a different set of concepts to think in.
Now let's go build, you know?
>> Yeah, yeah, which is fine for the most part,
as long as you don't ever have to look behind the curtain.
You know, it's the same with any piece of computing.
It presents a nice clean interface,
but there's a lot of effort to get there.
It's like an iceberg.
You only see the very tip of it,
but two thirds are like below the water level.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Basically, if it becomes a leaky abstraction, right?
And then you've got to deal with the underlying layer,
but not exactly.
Anyway.
- Exactly.
- All right.
Last question, and then we'll move off.
Talk about the lessons.
Luca asks, "Will textual have a polyfill for blank,
"like manual text blinking in terms
"which don't support it or, you know?"
But basically, I guess more interesting,
does it have polyfills and like other ways
to make stuff happen that's not naturally supported?
- Yeah, you know, it could quite easily.
You could set up a timer, you call setInterval,
which would toggle something to show the blink
or hide the blink.
I don't think I want to support it in Textual
'cause I don't want Textual apps to be blinking.
It's a terrible user interface for the most part.
The exception would be a cursor.
Sometimes you want a cursor to flash
so you can see where it is.
I think I might leave that one up to developer to implement.
And it probably is a two-line job.
- I can see a future where some movie has a fake hacker UI
implemented in Textual.
And they probably have a blank thing about when something's
going to blow up going on.
All right, let's move on.
Let's go through your lessons.
So this is what you've been building,
what you are building.
and obviously worked on Rich for a long time.
You've worked, you and your colleagues at the company
for a year now.
So tell us about the lessons.
Let's go through these.
- Yeah, okay, so terminals are fast.
This might surprise people and I can understand why.
- It surprised me.
- Yeah, 'cause when you use a terminal,
you type a few characters
and the characters appear on screen,
you hit return, you know, half a second later,
you'll get a response with some text.
And you don't think of terminals as being fast,
but nowadays they're built on the same technology
that runs video games.
So it uses the GPU to update the terminal
with new characters which have a background and a foreground.
And it turns out that if you can write updates
at 60 frames a second from the Python code,
the terminal will happily display it.
I was surprised at how smooth it was.
We had 60 frames per second animation of something
moving across the screen, and it looked silky smooth.
And that was updating the entire screen, like every frame.
Wow.
Yeah, I'm really impressed with the fact
that so many of these terminals are hardware accelerated,
like GPU accelerated.
And I'm just poking around--
what am I running here right now?
running iTerm, and has all these settings for GPU render redraws, and basically the
maximum frame rate.
And so things like this, it's just-- you would never expect to go find hardware acceleration
features inside the terminals.
But they have them.
They do, yeah.
And it's quite strange, because not much software takes advantage of that.
I mean, your day-to-day work at the terminal,
it doesn't need to be fast.
It really doesn't.
As long as it can add new data within a second,
you're probably quite happy.
So these terminals have been getting faster
and faster and faster.
And some of them, like I use Kitty
and something called Westerm,
and those are incredibly fast.
They're really optimized at getting things on the screen.
But most software--
Yes, Kiddy's excellent.
It's super fast.
But most software doesn't need it.
It's like you use Vim or Htop.
Htop updates once a second.
So it's like the developers of these terminals
are making it faster and faster and faster.
But there's very little software that makes use of it,
except for like sort of hobbyist demos
where they do like video to text things.
So you can see your face that's made up with ASCII characters,
which is fun.
But you don't think-- that's not really productivity software.
So I was very pleased that when I started working on Textual
that it wasn't a bottleneck.
If I could write things fast enough to terminal,
the terminal would happily accept it and render it.
Yeah.
So that opens the possibility for so many things
if you can get high frame rates.
You know, and the iTerm default was limit frames
to 60 frames a second.
60 frames a second, that's plenty fine
for really smooth animations.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And you know, I think it's probably
what my LCD monitor is stuck at, right?
So that's as fast as you're gonna see it basically anyway.
- That's it, and it can't,
there's not much use in it being any faster
because in order to see greater than 60 frames a second,
you have to have something that's moving
at greater than 60 frames a second.
And generally, you don't want things
flying about your terminal,
unless maybe you're making a video game.
We use animation quite sparingly
for nice kind of things like when a panel slides in,
the sidebar pops in, it's quite smooth.
We can also use it for fades, so we can set the opacity
of a block of text and have it fade away and fade in again.
And that's sometimes quite useful
if you want to draw the user's attention
to the fact that you've added a new item
rather than having it appear immediately.
It'll fade in.
So we can use animation in those places.
But again, it doesn't need to be anywhere near
60 frames a second.
No, it doesn't have to, but I do agree that
little bits of animation are super important
for making, for highlighting things
that people need to pay attention to without much effort.
And it doesn't have to be so bright colored
or right in the way, right?
If you just have a little thing slide down that says,
you know, this job is finished
while the other work is happening or whatever,
like that's really nice.
And you have a video here in this article,
the seven things article that we'll link to, obviously.
And it shows you running this thing called basic pie.
Is this included with textual or is it?
- Yeah, that's one of our sandbox apps.
So whenever we're testing something,
we just put it in basic.pie.
So it shows off like a number of the features we've got.
I think that video is quite old.
We've got some more cool stuff.
- I'm sure you do.
But one of the things that's really nice
is it shows a lot of the animations.
And one of the animations is changing the theme.
Another one is to pop out the side navigation.
And those are really nice, right?
The fact that that happens at a frame rate fast enough
that it looks completely smooth
means it doesn't just look like some terminal app
where a thing clicks in and then it clicks out.
it actually feels really nice and polished.
Yeah.
We've kind of identified--
there's like a sliding scale of animation.
At one end, you've got the scroll bars.
It might not be obvious, but those animate.
So if you click below it, it'll scroll smoothly downwards.
And also, it'll filter--
when you click and drag, it'll filter frames
between the motion of the mouse.
and it makes the scrolling look a lot more smooth.
So that's not obvious, but that is a use of animation.
And at that end of the scale,
I think most people would agree that's good, that's a bonus.
At the other end of the scale,
we've got things which are a bit gratuitous,
like the sidebar.
I like it, but some people might think,
I don't want to be distracted by this animation.
I just want it to appear instantly.
I want it to feel more snappy rather than animated.
So I think what we're gonna do
is we're going to have a switch where you can decide as a user
what kind of animation you like.
If you just want the scroll bars,
you can set it to be quite low.
And that would make the sidebar pop in instantly and disappear
instantly.
But if you love the animation, you
can just whack it up to the maximum.
And then it will use animation wherever
it can for fading and sliding, et cetera.
Fantastic.
So for example, with a scroll bar,
That's not actually the terminal scrolling it.
That's textual redrawing the screen and reprocessing it.
If it's not smooth, if it just goes clunk, clunk, clunk,
it's super hard to track when I scroll down,
where do I continue from and that kind of stuff, right?
It's not just there to make it feel good or feel smooth.
It really has important-- - It's not just icons.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly. - If you press the page down,
If it was to jump down instantly,
you wouldn't be able to find your place in the text again.
Your eye would just,
we'd have to like focus in to find where you're reading.
But if it scrolls in over say 300 milliseconds,
your eye tends to follow where you were reading.
So you move your eye, you follow the animation,
and then you're sort of reading again from the top.
And that's actually beneficial.
It's not just eye candy.
It's not just a gratuitous use of a feature, you know?
- Yeah, absolutely.
It's very, very helpful.
So you talked about all of this happening
without flickering in the terminal.
And we already discussed the GPU accelerated,
hardware accelerated aspects,
but you said also that's not necessarily enough.
So there's a couple of tricks that you highlight here.
Yeah, so the protocol of terminals
came about over many decades
and it wasn't designed to avoid flickering.
I think when people built the protocol--
They never imagined what you would be trying to do with it.
No, they didn't think someone was gonna be animating it
at 60 frames a second.
So there's no, well, there's very little help
to reduce flicker.
So there's a few things that you can do.
One I've discovered is it's better to overwrite content
without clearing it.
So if you want to animate, say a piece of text,
make it move, you might think I'll clear this text
and it'll draw on top of it.
But what that does is it'll introduce a potential
for a frame where you see where it's cleared.
And then you see the frame where it's updated
and that'll cause a flicker.
So if you just overwrite the content without clearing it,
then that reduces the chance of flickering.
- Yeah, I've also seen sometimes
some of these like progress bars
or the like little tables updating,
they seem to write new whole sections
and it's like filling your history
with every frame, you know,
your terminal history is like full of every frame
and stuff like that if you start to resize it
and there's all this weird stuff that happens
if you're not actually overriding it.
Well, textual goes into what's called application mode.
This is a feature of terminals.
So when you're in application mode,
you don't have a scroll back buffer.
The scroll back buffer has that problem.
It'll tend to fill up with garbage
if you're trying to animate things.
And it's also quicker because the terminal doesn't
have to worry about appending data and moving it, et cetera.
So textual goes into application mode.
and it's generally much faster and able to reduce that flickering.
- Trick two? - The trick two.
So, one of the problems with the protocol
is that it's not aware of flickering,
it doesn't know when to paint the screen.
So, you're sending it data, it needs to know when to update the screen.
If you write lots of small pieces of data,
say you're going to update a character over here,
you're gonna update a progress bar here, it might update a few of them and then
paint the screen and then update some others and paint the screen and it's
that brief moment where you've got half an update which is what causes flicker.
So what I've discovered is if you batch all your updates into one write, so you
used write to standard output the ones rather than you know several writes,
that will reduce the potential flicker quite a bit.
- Interesting.
Of course it would, and I've never really thought about it.
When you're doing regular pixel-based graphics programming,
you know, OpenGL, DirectX, those types of things,
they often set up what's called a double-buffered mode,
where you actually draw the screen on a hidden piece,
and then you swap that to be in one V-sync
to be the screen so you don't see the pieces streaming in
as it goes.
And this is the same equivalent thing for terminals, huh?
It's like double-buffered.
You write to it like a whole thing,
and then you make it the screen.
It's a very similar concept.
The terminal doesn't give you that.
It doesn't have an invisible buffer
that you can take your time to draw to.
So you have to implement that yourself.
But yeah, essentially, we're implementing a double buffer.
Yeah, very interesting.
And the third one has to do with synchronized output.
Yeah.
So doing the one write thing, that's very helpful.
But there's also a fairly recent addition
to the protocol which helps with this.
Basically, you write an escape code which says,
I am beginning an update.
And then you write your data.
And then you write another escape code which says,
I've finished the update.
And between those two escape codes,
the terminal won't update.
It will only update at the very last moment.
So that's kind of accomplishing the same thing
as the double buffer, but there's
protocol support for it.
So we do both because not all terminals support
these new escape codes.
So by doing both, we can ensure that it's
flicker-free on newer terminals and older terminals.
Fantastic.
Speaking of different terminals, Kim in the audience
asks, is application mode that you talked about earlier
with the buffer, a universal across all the terminals.
- It is, yeah.
It's been around for a long time.
If you've used H top or anything like it
or a full screen terminal app,
that'll use application mode.
- Yeah.
Final question while we're on this performance thing.
When will we see Doom implemented?
- People keep asking that.
I don't know.
It might happen.
I think it has to happen.
I mean, Doom runs virtually everywhere.
- It does.
- Yeah, maybe the first Doom, maybe not Doom Eternal.
- Yeah, yeah, now we're thinking the original Doom,
that really was amazing, right after Castle Wolfenstein.
Very good stuff.
- Yeah, I loved it.
- All right, so that was all some really interesting stuff
about terminals, but you also have some other
recommendations and discoveries that are pretty awesome,
even if you're doing other types of programming.
And one of them is dict views.
- Yeah.
Apparently I used dictviews a lot,
but I didn't really know they had a special name.
Tell us what are dictviews and then why are they useful?
- So dictviews are the object returned from a dictionary
when you call items or keys.
And I think almost all Python developers have used this,
but we tend to use them to iterate over
to get the keys and the items.
What you might not know is these are special objects.
They're not just simple iterables.
and they act a lot like sets, which kind of makes sense.
Because if you've got a dictionary,
the keys are all unique.
So you can't have a repeating key.
So if you've got a key view, it's set-like,
which means you can do set-like operations on it.
And--
- Asking the quick question, like,
is this thing I'm about to add in here or not?
Something like that, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
And you can take two different,
you can take a set and a key view and combine them
and see the intersection,
see what keys are common in both or neither.
And those type of operations turned out to be very useful
for what I was using it for.
And to be honest, I think this might be the first time
I've ever used that in Angular.
It's one of the things that you read about in the notes
for the latest Python and you think,
I can't imagine I'll ever use that.
And I didn't for years,
But then I had a problem where in Textual,
when we do a new update via CSS,
we've got two different data structures,
one with the old positions of things
and then one with the new positions of things.
And what we want to do is compare those two data structures
and find the things which have moved or have changed size.
And I started writing code for this
and it wasn't straightforward code.
It was a couple of hours in, I had written a lot of code
and I think, "No, that's a bit too slow.
It's a bit too awkward.
And only then did I remember the fact
that you could use these key views as set operations.
And the code turned out to be almost a one-liner.
And I was so happy about this.
I forgot the fact I'd spent two hours writing code
that I would just delete it.
Let me give people an example here who are listening.
So if you check out the blog post,
there's a nice code example.
And the UI of Textual is made up of all these widgets.
They've got names like header, footer, and sidebar.
And they have boundaries and regions, rectangles.
And as the UI changes, you might only
want to redraw the delta, not the whole thing,
for performance reasons.
And so given the old view and the new view,
the question is, well, what widgets have changed?
And so you just say, renderMap.items,
caret or symmetric difference with other newer framed items.
And that tells you these are the pieces that
have to be redrawn, right?
Yeah, that gets exactly the information needed.
That tells me which things are new,
which things have been removed, and then which
things have changed position.
And those three types of things are the things
that I need to redraw on the screen.
And it's a one-liner.
And I get that information for free
because it is very fast.
It runs at the C level and produces just information
that I needed.
>> Yeah.
Honestly, this surprises me that this is possible.
I would totally expect that with .keys
because keys have to be set like.
But items, you could have the same item
assigned to different keys all over the place and stuff.
So it's a little interesting here.
>> The item is, you know, obviously the key plus the value.
So together, they're unique.
The values are not unique.
- Oh, I see, that's right,
'cause that's a tuple of a key.
I see.
Got it, okay.
- So the keys are guaranteed to be unique, therefore.
- Yeah, that's, therefore, yeah,
whatever you add to it,
it's not gonna make it less unique by adding stuff.
More possible differences.
All right, so not totally related to this,
but I gotta ask it 'cause it's just so meta.
Andrew out in the audience asks,
can you embed a terminal within a textual app?
I've been asked this a few times.
I'm just wondering what people want to use this for.
But in theory, it should be possible.
It means I'd have to write a software layer which
interpreted all the escape codes and then translated that
to a region of a textual app.
But in theory, yes, it's possible.
Will we do it?
Maybe one day.
It's not the highest on the priority, but maybe.
Yeah, maybe.
OK, very interesting.
Is there something like a textual.contrib?
These extras that people put in,
like there's Django contrib and there's other contribs.
- Yeah, not currently, but I'm really hoping
that the community takes it and starts building things.
So you could search PyPy for textual_
and get lots of widget libraries and various add-ons.
- Is there like a plugin or extension aspect?
- Yes, so the widgets are designed to be built that way.
Widgets are like independent portions of the screen
that can handle events and things and updates.
And those can be bundled up into separate libraries,
third party libraries.
So that would be the easiest way to implement something.
You could implement anything you wish,
like a full IDE if you wanted to,
and just import it as a Python library.
- Sure.
All right, related to using DictViews for speed, it's really hard to beat caching for
speed isn't it?
Yeah, caching is awesome and it's one of the things which allows textual to be fast.
So LRU cache, I think a lot of people have used it but maybe not appreciated how fast
it is.
The caching and generating the key is done at the C level, so it's super fast and you
you can use it for quite small functions.
We've got a lot of calculations which are pretty quick.
You know, they're well under milliseconds,
they're like fractions of a millisecond.
But we do them a lot of times.
So we might do them like 10,000 times.
But if we introduce the LRU cache,
the time it takes to do those function calls
becomes the time it takes to essentially
do a dictionary lookup.
And then they become very fast.
So that led to quite surprising speed ups.
>>Yeah, so you have an example here
that you talk about where you're given a couple of regions,
and you do the intersection of those two,
a region being like a rectangle-like thing.
You've got to figure out, well, which is the top left most?
And like all those, there's a bunch of comparisons
to find the overlapping rectangle if it exists, right?
- Yeah, so it's not very complicated, it's not very slow.
It's just doing sort of arithmetic
and it's working on local variables.
That's generally the fastest kind of code
you can expect from Python.
You also, you create a region object
which has to reserve some memory.
But if you put the LRU cache on it,
that becomes a DIC lookup, so it becomes very fast.
And the type of calculations we're doing,
we often do the same ones many, many times.
So we'll use the same two values to find the intersection.
Like that the first time you update the screen,
you calculate some intersections,
and the second time maybe one or two items is moved,
but most of the same calculations are done again.
So LRU cache ensures that
you don't do those calculations again.
you just pick them out of a dictionary.
And yeah, big wins.
And it's so easy to just copy that one line
and everything works.
- Yeah, also it's kind of related
to what we're gonna get to here,
but this kind of code is fantastic
because in terms of caching,
'cause it doesn't really depend on something
that could change behind the scenes.
It doesn't have hold of like weird pointers
that could change in other ways.
And so it's very, very deterministic.
It's going to give you the same answer every time.
And it's not like the cache is going to get weirdly stale,
right?
Yeah, exactly.
So it's an immutable object.
I think region is actually a named tuple.
And you get all those benefits.
There's no side effects.
You can write these functions that
got an input and an output and it doesn't depend on any other state and when you have
that kind of function, I think they call it a pure function, caching works beautifully.
There's no hidden surprises.
And also I think it makes your code more easy to reason about.
You can trace it, you know, just manually.
You can tell what's going on just by looking at one function.
You can see the full story.
- Sure.
- Yeah, immutable objects.
If your code can use immutable objects,
I think you should favor it.
It doesn't always make sense,
but immutable is definitely best.
- Yeah, definitely easy to reason about.
Kim in the audience says,
"Presumably the memory cost of caching
"many frequently called functions
"isn't a big issue on a reasonable machine."
- Yeah.
- Maybe it's worth pointing out the max size parameter
you pass to the LRU cache.
That's right, so you set a maximum size
and if you add more items than that,
it'll throw out the oldest one.
So you can define the set,
the maximum size that you will record.
And it depends on how you use it.
If you tend to have like a common set of calculations
which you're doing repeatedly,
and those will kind of be in the cache most of the time.
And then you might have some calculations
which happen infrequently,
you know, combinations of input and output.
And then those get recalculated occasionally.
But it's still a big win.
And for 4096 items for that, the region's named Tuple.
It's quite small.
So that keeps the memory usage to something reasonable.
Yeah, very cool.
I did want to highlight this project called Async Cache.
Because I think--
I haven't checked lately, but I think
that LRU cache is only for synchronous functions?
- I think so, yeah.
- Yeah, I think so too.
Maybe it's been upgraded.
I haven't checked.
But let's just-- if it's still true,
there's this project called AsyncCache,
which has nearly the same UI, but applies to async functions.
So basically, the decorator has to return a function, which
is first checks the cache and then calls the function.
For the async version, that has to be an async function
returned out of the decorator, hence the difference, right?
And so this async cache has something really similar,
where you can have a LRU cache where you set the max size.
Or you can also have a time to live,
like I only want these results to stick around for 60 seconds.
It also has a bunch of other interesting features
that you can bring in, like works on ORM objects,
request objects, a bunch of other things.
It has like sort of custom support for custom types
that are, you know, one of the things that this needs here
is I think it's hashable.
I think you have to have hashable arguments
for LRU cache, yeah.
- Yeah, that strikes me as something very useful.
If you've got a calculation which does some awaits
and you want to cache it, then yeah,
That looks like a fantastic project.
- Yeah, not super popular.
People can check it out, but it looks pretty useful.
Okay, we kind of touched on this already,
so maybe we won't go too much into it,
but just one of the actual lessons you said
is immutability is definitely a good thing.
So we can get this from tuples, named tuples,
which are like better tuples.
You know, you can address them by a variable type
or frozen data classes.
- Yeah, I tend to think immutable first.
So I'll prefer to make my objects immutable.
And only when I think that's gonna become a hindrance
do I make them mutable.
And that's, I think, I started doing that a few years ago
and I think that's benefited my code.
So I'd recommend immutable objects.
- Yeah, and then if you're out there doing
gigantic, which many of us are these days,
it has faux immutability, which is kind of like it.
It takes a shot at making things immutable.
And you can just say a lab mutation false
as the config for your Pydantic model,
which is pretty fantastic.
- Yeah, I think Python doesn't support
true immutability, immutability.
If you really wanted to, you could do some horrible hack
to change an object, which should be immutable.
But you know, like Python's philosophies,
we're all adults here, right?
So don't do crazy things like that.
- And even for languages that have like the word const
and stuff, it still doesn't necessarily mean
what you think it means.
There's a little bit of Monty Python going on.
No, princess bride sort of thing going on there
where, okay, so this object says it can't be mutable
and it has pointers to other objects.
And so sure, you can't reassign those pointers,
but that thing points to something
which points to something, which internally you
call a function which changes.
You know what I mean?
Like, to get true immutability is super hard and super
restrictive.
So--
Super hard, yeah.
So Python isn't too bad in that respect.
It's definitely safer than C, C++, et cetera.
That's for sure.
OK, immutability is good.
So is Unicode art.
What the heck is this?
So in the textual code, there's quite a lot
of functions like this, which are kind of geometric.
So it might divide something into two or--
Yeah, it's always doing visual things, right?
Quite a lot of visual things.
So here we've got an example.
It's a function which takes a region
and splits it into four by making two--
making a horizontal and a vertical cut.
And that's quite hard to express in English succinctly.
I mean, you can do it, but it'll take you like a big paragraph.
But if you create something like this, this kind of Unicode art
using various box characters, you
can draw a diagram to show what you're doing.
And if you're coming to that code later,
that just makes it really obvious at a glance
what it's doing.
So I'm a big fan of that kind of Unicode art.
And I use an application called Monodraw, which is macOS only,
but there are similar applications
for other platforms.
And yeah, I use it wherever I can, also
because it's kind of fun.
It has got a powerful ASCII art editor designed for the Mac.
It costs money, $9 and $10.
I love that it has educational pricing,
but it only costs $10.
That's kind of cool.
But yeah, it's pretty neat.
I guess you have little arrows and boxes.
And just like you might draw with PowerPoint or Keynote
or something like that as kind of your--
let me put together a visual graphic.
But the output is ASCII art.
Yeah, and it's kind of like a vector graphic type thing.
So if you draw a box, you can click on the box and drag it.
It's not like a bitmap.
So I find it--
Oh, that's fantastic.
Yeah, it's quite powerful.
I hope the authors made a fortune out of it, frankly,
because I love it.
So what is the output like?
You output to clipboard?
Yeah, you can cut and paste it.
You can output to clipboard.
You can write it to a text file.
I usually cut and paste it directly into Python code.
Yeah, of course.
So that's really cool.
It also made me think of something that's not exactly
the same purpose, but balsamic.
I don't know if you're familiar with Balsamiq, which is really great for developing UIs.
I don't know if they have a gallery or something.
They need some more graphics on this thing here.
>> Yeah, I've used Balsamiq for a while.
It's been around for a long time, hasn't it?
>> It's been around forever, yeah.
But it basically lets you create UIs that look almost like as if they were created using
ASCII art.
Not quite, but it's an interesting goal.
I did also want to highlight the most useful piece of ASCII art.
To be clear, all of this discussion is what goes in the comments, right?
What goes in the code comments or the doc strings?
The one for the object allocator in Python.
So if you look in obmalloc.c in CPython,
there's all this fairly intense looking code
for allocating memory when it's particular CPython objects,
like a pyobject or pylong or whatever.
If you scroll down to the section here,
around line 777, it has a paragraph.
It says, "An object allocator for Python.
Here's an introduction to the layers
of Python's memory architecture, et cetera."
And instead of having an essay in here,
it has this incredible graphic
that is like vertically aligned and shows you,
here's where we allocate things like integers and lists,
and here's Python core non-object memory allocation,
and here's how it relates down to the OS
into actual hardware.
What do you think of this?
- That's pretty awesome.
A lot of respect to the author
because I'm fairly sure they didn't use Monodraw.
I think they did that by hand,
you know, typing the characters and spaces and everything.
So yeah, it's pretty awesome.
- Yeah, I think this is really fantastic.
I was trying to piece together,
you know, I did a course on Python memory
and I was trying to piece together like,
well, how do I visually represent how it is described
that the memory works?
And I'm like, well, let me go look in the source code.
And I was looking at this like, there's an actual picture here.
This is amazing.
I can't believe it.
So, so neat.
Yeah.
So anyway, if people need a concrete example
of the type of stuff you're talking about,
here's one that's pretty close to home.
We all use it every day and we didn't know.
>> Cool.
>> Fractions.
I was always amazed at the fact that 0.1 plus 0.1 plus 0.1
is not equal to 0.3.
I learned that in school and it was,
but for some reason it's not.
What do you think?
- Yeah, so this is a problem that goes,
this is not just Python, it's pretty much any language
which uses floats and doubles,
which is like almost all of them.
And it trips up beginners and experienced developers.
It tripped up me when I was working on textual,
we have lots of code which will divide the screen
into various proportions.
So you might have a third and then a two thirds
and you might divide the height into sevenths.
And what I found was that when I use floats,
got a lot of rounding error.
Actually, not a lot of rounding error,
but occasional rounding error, which
means it wouldn't draw a line or it wouldn't draw a column.
Because this kind of issue where the rounding error
is compounded, and then it's been rounded down
to the nearest character.
Right.
You've got to talk in little block pieces anyway.
And if it just misses it, right?
If it just misses it by 0.0000001,
then you'll be a whole character out.
And I did come up with various ways of solving this
where I used integers rather than floats
and kept track of the error,
which I think is the standard approach of doing it,
but it was quite tricky code
and I'd get it wrong too frequently.
But then I remembered fractions.
So fractions, they behave just like numbers,
but they start out life as a numerator and denominator.
So you have fraction 1, 2 equals 1/2.
And the great thing about fractions in the standard
library is they don't suffer from that rounding error.
So if you have 3 1/10, it'll add up to 3/10 exactly
with no rounding error.
And it makes that kind of code, which I do a lot of in
Textual, to be much simpler.
So I was very happy when I re-remembered it, because I
must have known years ago and thought, "Why do I need fractions?"
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
This is not elementary school.
I don't need this.
Go on.
A lot of Python is like that.
We can just say point one.
Yeah.
So you learn that you think, "Well, that's probably useful to mathematicians or something
or someone else, not to me."
But if you work long enough, you'll eventually find a problem where that is actually the
perfect solution for it.
Yeah.
I didn't know about these either.
I see comments in the audience as well, like, fractions, what is this madness?
So you're telling us that you can only work in rational numbers, not, you know, irrational
numbers like pi and e.
We can't have, can't have, yeah, columns that are e wide.
No, no, you can't.
Or pi high, you know.
It's pi by e.
No, it's cut off.
Darn it.
Yeah.
- The cool thing is that fractions,
you can drop in replacements to floats.
So if you've written some code
which was previously using floats,
and then you pass in fractions,
everything will work as normal,
except you'll not get the round here.
So it's really kind of beautiful.
- Okay, so you're saying the fraction library
supports things like division, multiplication, additions,
and basically would duck typing behave the same?
- Yes, duck typing is a rational number.
So anywhere where you use a float, fractional work.
I learned about that.
Amazing.
Let's see.
Emojis are hard.
You talked a little bit about things
that take up different sizes and Unicode and whatnot.
Yeah.
So when I started Textualize and I got my first employee,
I thought, this is a problem that I want to tackle
because it has been bugging me for two whole years.
And the problem is basically this,
that some characters will take up two cells in the terminal,
they're double wide,
and some characters will take up one cell.
And if you want to do any kind of formatting,
say to draw a line or a panel around it,
you need to know exactly how many cells
a piece of text will take up.
And it sounds like a simple problem,
all you need to do is know how many cells
a character will take up.
you might have a function which takes a character and returns either one or two.
And in essence that's what rich does, but at some characters you can't know
because they will render differently on different terminals, they'll render
differently on iTerm and Windows and Linux and it gets even more complicated.
you can get multiple characters, sorry, multiple, what's the, multiple code points in a character.
So you might have something like a flag and a flag has like a two letter character code
and another character code which tells you this is a flag.
So if you iterate over that you get three code points.
So you have to know, first of all, how everything works together and there's quite a lot of
those type of characters.
I can't imagine how tricky it is to be done inside Unicode.
Yeah, yeah, it's crazy.
This is very, very complex.
And we thought, well, we'll just do it.
We'll just apply some engineering effort
and just do it.
But we discovered that it was impossible to know,
because you can't tell how the terminal is going
to render these Unicode.
It might do it correctly.
It might actually render a single character.
If the terminal is not aware of multi-code point emojis,
then you might get three characters.
They might render as nothing, or they
might render as three double-width characters.
They might not even render properly,
so they might overlap the following character.
Some number of boxes.
Yeah, it's just every terminal did it differently.
Not only the terminal, it was platform dependent.
So if the terminal used the Unicode database
on the operating system, then you'd get different results if it shipped its own copy of the
Unicode database.
And it just turned out it was impossible to know how many characters.
So what do you do?
Well there's a subset up to about Unicode 9 where things seem to be mostly sane, most
terminal support.
So if you use those, those are fine.
But after that, it becomes unreliable.
If you have flags and multi-code point characters, then it might not work.
It might cause the alignment of tables and panels to be out.
You know, the end character might be shifted out by one and it just comes up so frequently
and I would solve it if I could.
But as far as I can tell, there is no reasonable solution which will work across all platforms
Too many unknowns, right?
Too many unknowns, yeah.
It's a crazy thing, but it kind of makes sense because these Unicode characters came out
in the last few years and operating systems and terminals haven't caught up and they haven't
agreed on how to render them.
So it's a frustrating situation.
But I'm sure there is.
Yeah, if you look at some of the nerd fonts, for example,
when I--
at nerdfonts.com, you look at some of these, what is possible?
I think here, you have these colored arrows.
And do they have--
if you go over to Oh My Posh, which I don't really
have time to talk about.
But if you look at the themes that are in here,
the different themes that you can pick,
and just some of the effects, like a character that looks like a git branch with an arrow
in it. How are you supposed to decide how big that is? Or how is some of this stuff
accomplished? It's just mind-blowing.
I don't know how they represent those characters. I wonder if they reuse existing characters.
When I saw that, I was like, "Okay, I don't know how this is possible."
Rounded edges and all sorts of stuff.
I'm trying to find one where it's like a sparkly fade from one character to the next.
These things over on the omyposh.dev themes, if I thought about your job to figure out
what is that supposed to look like, I don't know, I would just give up.
They're really impressive and really useful, but this one, for example, the cert theme,
where it's got little dots that fade from one to the next.
I just don't know.
Amazing, but how are you supposed to know, right?
Cool.
All right.
Those are your lessons.
Very cool stuff.
I really appreciate you coming on to talk about the seven lessons.
Terminals are fast.
Dict views are amazing.
LRU cache is fast.
Immutable is good.
Unicode R is good.
Fractions are good.
Emoji is bad.
Does that summarize it?
>>That about, yeah, in a nutshell.
>>Oh, let's wrap it up with one more thing real quick here.
Let me see if I can find it.
This one?
There we go.
So one of the-- sort of bringing it full circle back around.
One of the cool things to make terminals nicer
that you've talked about recently is rich-cli.
You want to close out the show and just tell us
what rich-cli is?
Sure.
So as you know, rich is a library.
And rich-cli is a CLI interface for that library.
So most of what rich can do is exposed by rich-cli.
So you can cat most file formats,
and they'll be nicely syntax highlighted.
And you'll have line numbers and guidelines
and all sorts of things.
And you can do things like add panels.
You can format text.
What else does-- a whole bunch of other features.
Yeah, so for example, if I had a JSON document on the terminal,
I could type--
I could open it in some terminal-based editor,
think SSH somewhere.
Or I could just type "more" or "cat," the name of it,
and it would print out just plain text
of whatever is on the inside.
Now I could type "rich" the file name and I get highlighted, colorized, formatted content
for like CSV and JSON and all those kind of things, right?
Yeah, yeah.
So the rich, the JSON example is quite good because that will decode the JSON.
So if you've got like compressed JSON with no white space, it makes it impossible to
read.
Rich will decode it and it will also format it and...
I see.
Pretty Prince it, exactly.
And it'll do markdown, it'll do a reasonable job of rendering markdown and it'll take CSV
files and it'll turn those into nice rich tables and if your output is quite large you
can add --pager and that'll put it in a nice pager where you can scroll up and down with
scroll bars and do page up, page down, etc.
So it's kind of like a toolbox for fancy, rich formatting
of all sorts of different data types.
Yeah, definitely a cool project.
And I know you're concerned about emojis,
but Paul in the audience says, fortunately, Doom
does not require emojis.
So it's still on the table.
I suppose not, yeah.
That's right.
All right, well, fantastic lessons.
Thanks for sharing all of your experience.
Final two questions before you get out of here.
If you're going to write some Python code, work on rich,
what editor are you using these days?
It's not so meta that you're using textual
to write textual yet, is it?
- No, maybe one day, but no, I use VS Code
and I quite like it, I'm comfortable with it.
My colleague uses, what's the editor by JetBrains?
- PyCharm.
- PyCharm, and he's very proficient at PyCharm.
And to be honest with you, I am jealous
of some of the features of PyCharm.
it does some really cool things.
So I'm kind of tempted to try PyCharm.
Looking over the shoulder.
Awesome.
Yeah.
Very cool.
And then notable PyPI package.
I mean, we've touched on some good ones
that start or end with rich.
But anything else you run across that you're like,
oh, this is fantastic.
People should check this out.
Oh, gosh.
There's so many at once.
I'm drawing a blank.
I should have prepared one in advance.
- How about one that you use
that makes rich work well or something?
- Well, there's Prompt Toolkit.
So I owe Prompt Toolkit a big debt of gratitude
because when I was figuring out the textual stuff,
I looked at the Prompt Toolkit source code,
which is a great thing about open source
that you can look at other people's code.
And it is very good.
It helped me understand things
and it still does things which textual doesn't do yet.
So I think Prompt Toolkit is an excellent project.
And if you haven't used it, you should definitely check it out.
Yeah, Prompt Toolkit's interesting.
You'll be typing along, and all of a sudden,
there's like a combo dropdown box,
like a select right in the middle of your terminal,
and then you just carry on.
Yeah, it makes things--
I think it's used in IPython.
It makes that much nicer, much more friendly.
Absolutely.
All right, well, final call to action.
People want to do stuff with rich text rule,
maybe take some of these lessons and run with them.
What do you tell them, Will?
- Yeah, check out the website,
check out my Twitter profile,
and if you have any questions,
feel free to ping them over to me.
I'm always happy to talk to people
about Python-related things.
- Yeah, fantastic.
And of course, I'll list the link to the article
with your list of topics there,
so people can check that out.
- Cool.
- Thank you so much for being here.
- Thanks, Michael. - It's been great
to catch up with you.
- Thank you. - You bet.
- Take care. - Bye.
- Bye-bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]